Today’s technology has advanced to a point where the graphical user and three-dimensional are on use. Unlike the earlier when people had to produce everything practically, the computation skills have amazingly incorporated the touch, voice or click commands. The main aim of most companies is to embrace technological skills, to make the human tasks easier. Arguably, today’s technology requires inventiveness and resourcefulness especially in the advertisement sectors such as use of internet enables resourceful communication and sharing of information. Advancement engagements are however appreciative due to the quality and quantity of output.
Star Marketing Agency is an advertising agency with a primary base of business dealings within the Los Angeles County or Orange County
Advertising platform. It has a specialty on creation of affordable marketing and advertising campaigns for other growing companies. Most of its capabilities revolve about “branding, web designing, advertisements, and public relations.”

The company has capability to check on strategic plans and build a platform of marketing strategies, come up with approaches for negotiating media contracts and recommend sales support efforts for other companies. “The aim is to eventually create a consistent corporate identity across multiple media platforms” (Jin, 2005).
This paper forms an analysis of technological effects on Star Marketing and advertisements business dealings. What are the main situational affects of computer technology on business production especially its impact on the marketing and advertising sectors. The analysis also focuses on the intellectual behaviour of people regarding the effects of technological changes to the business settings.

Star Marketing and Advertisement company deals with marketing of businesses through evaluation of developmental problems associated with the business setting. It offers the global approach towards products and services awareness over the usage of computer systems and mobile telephony. What determines business marketing and advertising actions? The company dealings address the issue of utilizing the new and anticipated computerized knowledge or electronic skills in advertising.
Star Marketing and Advertising Agency focuses on the issues of technology in businesses and advertising. According to Kalakota and Robinson’s definition (2002), “advertising is distribution of any kind of message or promotion that adds value to the customer, while enhancing revenue for the firm.”

The electronic advertisement entails advertising through electronic billboards as a way of ensuring clients know existence of the business and its seriousness. Electronic billboards have great impact and the message rarely fails to address the intended meaning. The other method is the mobile advertisement that is at its vast edges of growth among many users.
In a close link to Star Marketing Agency, the right marketing occurs in the presence of passion, experience, knowledge, vision and curiosity. As a firm that is concern with raising other firms to a competitive level by marketing and enhancing promotion of the products, the company is not the typical business-advertising agency that fits the needs of a specific company. The transactions styles enhances capabilities to approach the marketing challenges from different point of views and employ a wide range of disciplines such as branding, print advertising, promotions, and building collaterals among others.

According to Jin (2005), today it is not wise to confine marketing strategies to the television, radio or print media, the options are quite diverse. The biggest question many people ask regards the effect of technology on advertising especially for the already known products. How would technology enhance advertising when there are already millions of personal views, pod casts and wide direct connections with production companies?
One prominent impact of the internet technology is on the creation of a democratic media. The broadcast is international and free, and according to Jin (2005), the highly recognized advertisement sites need to allow personal perspectives and make the aspect of internet publishing easy and accessible to majority without the need for technical knowledge. The available tools ought to promote democracy for the macro-media such as web-blogs, video casts, wikis and pod casts.

The universal knowledge behind the current technological tools enhances knowledge transmission by allowing direct and literal subscription of contents such as the Rich Site Summary (RSS) feed facility, which allows automatic syndication of text, audio or visual data to subscribers. Most of these adopted RSS allow people to publish and update news feeds on the internet. In a close link to Jin’s writing (2005), today people are no longer mare consumers but producers as well because of the ability to produce and share data.
The word of mouth especially from someone who is known or trustworthy remains as the best style of advertisement since time in memorial. Compensating the comments by use of advertisements is almost impossible. This form of advertising has come back in form of the internet-based forums on the sites that allow users to place personal comments or requests.

Just like the earlier tittle-tattle conversations, the web sites enjoy incorporation into the databases of common search engines like Google thus becoming recognizable as important sources of information. Many of these real-time comments posted by consumers are enough evidence that the word of mouth is back on a supercharged format.

Professionals would argue that the greatest influence to buying patterns fall upon the brand of the product but the impact of the real-time comments is higher. Majority of the conceivable customers like to base their decisions on the rational world. Internet advertising means that every strength and flaw is available, for instance, if one wanted to acquire a car, it is possible to find some models, their reviews, pricing and the comments some people have over the car.
A willing buyer would want to know what the other person who has experience of the product has to say and pessimistic comments would definitely affect negatively on the sales. Brand building is not the only big influence in today’s advertising territory, as experts would claim. The comments do not create the brand but have great damages in this hyperactively connected world.

The hyperactive connected world phenomenon might be quite new in the advertising industry, but evidently as Star Marketing Agency indicates, the errors committed by companies or its representatives get instant communication today among consumers and may have huge impacts to the business. This is an indication of the power of the electronic billboards, search engines and thus the need for information technology in the advertisement industries.

Today the companies can be able to use the comment related sites to feature available goods or services, find and resolve problems involving common sales. Before embracement of technology, the foundations for most advertisement were supporting ‘information asymmetry’ phenomenon (Levitt and Dubner, 2006). Most company fails to reveal truthful information because of aims for easy influences to target groups or change on negative public perception as a strategy of influencing the market.

The companies whose products experienced market inferiority complex utilize the strategy as well. The effect of such advertisement campaign on the hyperactive connected markets would face zero-rating by the fact that the consumers have knowledge and expertise to tap information from the huge base of consumer comments. The clients have the ability to know any inferiority complexes facing some products in the market even in good time. The connecting technologies have enhanced information symmetries.

In line with Levitt and Dubner (2006), the connected clients do not face high advertisements influences in comparison to their unconnected counterparts. Technology leaves no room for advertisement lies thus promoting fair transparent communication. There is enough information access and thus consumers can enjoy fair judgement over advertisement campaigns and invalidate the questionable ones whenever they find the need to (Levitt and Dubner, 2006).

The new advertisement language
The commercial massages are no longer in use today, in a close link to Star Marketing Agencies, clients want the great life comments from experiences that fellow consumers have had with particular services or goods. They prefer reading information from the company’s site as opposed to basing their judgements on commercial advertisements through the media. The mobile technology enables the client to connect at free will and reach out for third person’s opinion or find some technical information to make good decisions.

Customers wish to talk to the companies other than getting information through the traditional advertisements thus the need to adopt a technologically based language. This calls for the need to use advertising as a tool for conversing with the micro targets as opposed to the large target groups. The consumer/company relationship overrules the possibility of faking the information regarding advertisements. With this kind of system, it is also easy to identify faking of comments posted among internet users.

Personification cannot workout in the new advertising mechanisms of “blogging”. Arguably, the internet commenting technology takes the natural human tone of communication. Detection of fraudsters by users can easily occur owing to the concept in unique styles of the chat rooms.
The mobile telephony industry is under constant and effective growth to enable clients to have their personal opinions. It utilizes transmission of audio data, short messaging texts (SMS), e-mails, the multimedia messages texts, picture messages and broadcasting services (Tahtinen and Salo, 2004).

Mobile governance in businesses involves the extension of concepts of governing to deliverance of information, goods or services to the clients in a civilized and personalised manner (Tahtinen and Salo, 2004). The advancement of technology influences the way information is accessible as well as the point of origin. The mobile commerce is a concept that has improved widely in reference to distribution of text or multimedia messages in the aim of enhancing business activities (Barnes and Scornavacca, 2004).

The cell phones industry currently takes control of the information transfer field with ease because of the low and fundamental initial setup costs involved. The user experience and business models especially in developing countries remain a big hindrance to its full adoption. The various methods of mobile advertising such as the “WAP banners and the event oriented” texts fail to meet the satisfaction because they lack enough advertisers confidence as well as the creativity required to capture client’s attention.

The unyielding problems relates to usability, dissatisfaction of the consumer and lack of flexibility or longevity in usage of wireless data advertisement. The technology thus only captures certain corporate users or market niche such as the high-income earners and mobile technology professional with the ability to meet the premium fees (Barnes and Scornavacca, 2004).
With regard to the above-mentioned perceptions, the new and advanced electronic communication styles of advertising in the business industries have huge and negative influences to the older generations mainly due to the generation differences. There has been so much revolution on the way communication is today.

It is under high performance to a point that the youth have the ability to consume news twice as fast as the creating or publishing speed. Although the older generations are regaining their long lost trust over the use of the web for advertising at a remarkable speed in the aim of catching up with the rest, most of them are not yet able to get closest to the current internet bubble.
The talks about brands and products mean that companies ought to participate through partnership with the advertisement industries. The conversations are the today’s determinants of sales, thus the need for the companies to engage in these procedures of incorporating the micro media in the marketing plans. Most companies are able to monitor the customers’ comments and requests though the search engines (Barnes and Scornavacca, 2004).

The technology offers a system where a customer’s complain gets a solution from the company through a response in real time before the issue gets out of hand. Such interaction enables brand relations between the micro media enterprises and the company due to the connections by the advertising agencies. Useful insights are also achievable to offer the real-time feedback over a product and its reputation in the market. The advertising agents can then be in a position to know where products transformations or requirements are important.

They offer advice over the issues of decision making over active or passive participation in advertising. If taken in the right procedure, “Blogging” is an interesting part of advertising because it assists the company to create a closer relationship with the consumer thus has a better understanding of the needs and requirements (Levitt and Dubner, 2006). It offers the client the opportunity to build a rapport with the company and enhances transparency and honesty. The action a business decides to take requires influence of the agent, who must have studied the consumer comments in adherence to technology.
Instead of the earlier conception of trying to find ways of expanding business via the internet with the sole aim of making profit, business are now engaging the popular styles of utilizing agencies to share information and connect potential clients. The business ideas are now more eminent as opposed to business models.

The internet has now become a social facility where people can read, add, write, change and even consult the web page authors. The search of any micro media information is equally a common and efficient scenario. A huge group of people are virtually able to work together. This are the system that support the users view over the use of information and how it helps to review and rate information in order to be in a position of making proper decisions.
The future of electronic advertising has its basis on the broadband of the mobile devices, such as phones. This is an opposition to the current static web technology on the mobile devices such as laptops or palmtops. The aim is to make the geographical contextual information easy and possible through the mobile advertising that covers a wider geographical context. The level of delivery also changes to a point of an online delivery where the users have access to most recent news. Advertising depends on the public driven macro media.

Although dependent on the political decisions regarding privacy issues, the advertising industries anticipate a state where, the future advertisements will have a strong geographical and technological awareness. Today it is eminent that the role of computers has a huge impact on every person.

Computerisation has taken over majority of the societal roles and has greatly improved lives. The most advanced machines include the intelligent systems that have the ability to control other manual machines. Today the manufacture industries use computer procedures and information fed to the processing systems to give out the desired output. The battle with technology is dynamic and a continuous process expected to bring about new challenges every day.

This mainly influences on the marketing and advertising department is very vibrant due to the stable anticipated creativity. The society is dependent of technology today and having the computers in the workplace, homes and at hand enables effectiveness, and efficiency required for better and all round businesses. The computers cuts down on the production costs and time since there